GDPR notes from Institutions
================
Andrea Seisler
2020-02-18 12:15:32

## Questions and Concerns from EU Institutions regarding GDPR

### Queen’s University Belfast

In order for this to be compliant with our obligations under GDPR the
explicit consent of the data subject will be required. We do not
normally rely on consent, but to enable the international restricted
transfer of data as Databrary is based in the US and not covered by
Privacy Shield.

Consent is defined in Article 4(11) GDPR as:

“any freely given, specific, informed and unambiguous indication of the
data subject’s wishes by which he or she, by a statement or by a clear
affirmative action, signifies agreement to the processing of personal
data relating to him or her”.

Article 7 also sets out further ‘conditions’ for consent, with specific
provisions on:

  - keeping records to demonstrate consent;
  - prominence and clarity of consent requests;
  - the right to withdraw consent easily and at any time; and
  - freely given consent if a contract is conditional on consent.

In relation to the restricted transfer the data subject would need to be
give precise details about the transfer and the possible risks of making
a transfer to a country that does not have provide adequate protection
for personal data and without any other appropriate safeguards in place
i.e. if Databrary were to sign up to the Standard Contractual Clauses.

My main concern would be how to manage consent? How can personal data be
removed? Who will be responsible for this?

If Jocelyn is purely accessing information and not uploading I see no
issue.

[Standard contractual clauses for data transfers between EU and non-EU
countries](https://ec.europa.eu/info/law/law-topic/data-protection/international-dimension-data-protection/standard-contractual-clauses-scc_en)

### University of Manchester

I do not, obviously, know anything about the research project involved
or about the nature and extent of the data being collected, but these
measures would usually be along the lines of: - Has the project received
appropriate ethical approval?  
\- Has the researcher undertaken appropriate Data protection training?  
\- Has the researcher completed a Data Management Plan?  
\- Are the data subjects aware of this use of their data and their
rights under European law? (There may be ways around this one, but we
would need to know details of the project before we could advise) - Will
we be a data controller or data processor for this data?  
\- Is there any special category data involved?

In summary, I don’t think that there is any bar to us signing this
agreement in a data protection context, but we would need to be sure
that the appropriate internal work had been done before we could receive
and start using the data.

### University of Leeds

Under GDPR we cannot agree to accept the HIPAA code of conduct in
relation to the work we are proposing to make available unless Databrary
(possibly under HIPAA obligations) is compliant with the ‘Privacy
Shield’ level of operation – if so then we may be able to transfer the
recording’s subject to any further use of those recordings being
compliant with the Privacy Shield Framework. This would mean that any
organisation/body wishing to access the recording’s from thereon would
also have to agree that they operate and are wholly compliant with the
Privacy Shield Framework. See: <https://www.privacyshield.gov/welcome>

If any body was not compliant then we would need to ask them to sign the
attached GDPR standard terms, unequivocally.

Is it possible to accommodate this at all? We were hoping that a way
around this could be by adding a disclaimer on the Databrary site that
access to such recordings could only be granted after accession to the
attached GDPR document, or solid confirmation that that body was
compliant with the Privacy Shield Framework.

### University of Edinburgh

Our legal team at the University of Edinburgh has expressed serious
concerns about the transfer of our data to Databrary, due largely to the
nature of the data we intend to submit (videos of participants in an
experiment, who are anonymous but potentially recognisable) and also, if
I understand it correctly, to the fact that, outside Privacy Shield, the
US is not recognised as a country providing fully adequate data
protection by GDPR standards.

### University of Warwick

1.  We do not, as a policy sign up to contracts with a hold harmless
    provision.

I would require the term “and renders harmless” to be removed from the
contract

2.  We usually require a two way indemnity and in any event that
    indemnity is usually capped (below is the language we use)

<!-- end list -->

  - X1. The aggregate liability of each Party in connection with this
    Agreement or the subject matter hereof (whether arising in contract,
    tort (including negligence) or otherwise) shall be limited to ten
    thousand pounds sterling (£10,000).

  - X2. Subject to clause X3 neither Party shall be liable to the other
    Party for any indirect, consequential or special damages or losses,
    or any loss of profits, loss of revenue (other than revenue due
    under this Agreement or any other agreement entered into between the
    Parties) which arises directly or indirectly from that Party’s
    breach or non-performance of this Agreement, or negligence in the
    performance of this Agreement or from any liability arising in any
    other way out of the subject matter of this Agreement even if the
    Party bringing the claim has advised the other Party of the
    possibility of those losses arising, or if such losses were within
    the contemplation of the Parties.

  - X3. Nothing in this Agreement limits or excludes either Party’s
    liability for:
    
      - X3.1 death or personal injury caused by negligence; or
      - X3.2 fraud or for any other type of liability that, by law,
        cannot be limited or excluded.  
      - X3.3 Breach of relevant data protection legislation

<!-- end list -->

3.  Photographs are definitely personal data, so we would need
    reassurance that the data we are receiving the data is
    GDPR-compliant. ( general Data Protection Regulation) , There
    doesn’t appear to be any confirmations in here about the legal
    basis or authority for sharing the images. Do you provide any
    information or have a policy about GDPR compliance when providing
    images to users in Europe?

### University of Giessen

In Europe, we now have a new data protection regime which makes such
agreements a little bit more complicated. For example, in our data
protection agreements we have to make sure that data will be deleted,
for example in 10 or 15 years. As far as I understood databarary, the
data won’t be deleted. This could be a problem. So, we will further work
on the issues and then let you know.

### Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam

Comments on Ethical Data Sharing under the GDPR Summary by Jessica
Hrudey, Research Data Officer for Faculty of Behavioural and Human
Movement Sciences at the VU Advise sought from Privacy Lawyers from
Administrative Affairs at the VU

• As a starting point, I think we need more clarity regarding how the
“[participant-rights.md](participant-rights.md)” document will be
applied. Is this intended to a standalone template for an information
letter and informed consent form or is the intention that the text will
be added to an existing information letter and informed consent form?  
o The reason that I ask this, is that it helps to define: a) who the
party is that is obtaining consent and b) what information needs to be
present to meet GDPR requirements.  
o The privacy lawyers at our institution immediately questioned this,
which is why they state the following: “Transparency

When the GDPR applies, all of the information mentioned in articles 13
and 14 GDPR should be provided to the participants. Article 13 GDPR
applies when personal data are collected from the data subject (for
example by a researcher contributing to Databrary). Article 14 GDPR
applies when personal data are not obtained from the data subject (for
example when Databrary obtains personal data from a researcher, or when
a researcher of commercial organization subsequently obtains personal
data from Databrary).

Much of the information required by articles 13 and 14 GDPR is currently
missing in the templates, such as:  
• Identity of the controller  
• Recipients of the personal data  
• Source of the personal data (in case article 14 GDPR applies)  
• Storage period (the storage period may not be indefinite)  
• Information regarding safeguards with respect to transfers of personal
data from countries within the European Economic Area (EEA) to countries
outside the EEA (see our comments on ‘International Data Transfers’
below)  
• Rights of data subjects (such as access, rectification, restriction,
complaints, etc.)

Note that the information mentioned in article 13 GDPR should be
provided to participants at the time when personal data are collected.
We anticipate that the main challenge with respect to article 13 GDPR
will be (for the researcher contributing to Databrary) to provide
transparency regarding the recipients of personal data and the
safeguards with respect to international data transfers.

Next, the information mentioned in article 14 GDPR should be provided
“within a reasonable period after obtaining the personal data, but at
the latest within one month” (article 14(3)(a) GDPR). We anticipate that
the transparency obligations under article 14 GDPR will be especially
difficult to meet in the ‘Databrary landscape’, because parties subject
to these obligations (both Databrary itself and researchers and
companies accessing Databrary) will operate in the background - and as
such it will be very difficult for them to provide said information to
participants.

For your information, note that the EU data protection authorities have
issued [guidelines on transparency under the
GDPR](https://www.autoriteitpersoonsgegevens.nl/sites/default/files/atoms/files/guidelines_on_transparency.pdf)
in which they explain which information should be provided as a minimum
in their view. Please refer to these guidelines in order to get a better
understanding of the transparency requirements. The table on the last
pages of the guidelines (pages 36 – 40) is especially helpful in our
view.

Consent

When the GDPR applies, consent should meet the conditions set out by the
GDPR (articles 4(11) and 7-9 GDPR). Again, the EU data protection
authorities have published guidelines on this topic. In their
[guidelines on consent under the
GDPR](https://www.autoriteitpersoonsgegevens.nl/sites/default/files/atoms/files/guidelines_on_consent.pdf),
they explain among other things what the minimum content requirements
are for consent to be “informed” (in the sense of article 4(11) GDPR).
In short, these include (page 13):

• The controller’s identity  
• The purpose of each of the processing operations for which consent is
sought (when there are multiple purposes, the participant should be able
to provide separate consent for each purpose)  
• What (type of) data will be collected and used  
• The existence of the right to withdraw consent (and how to do this) •
Information about the use of the data for automated decision-making in
accordance with article 22(2)(c) GDPR where relevant, and  
• On the possible risks of data transfers due to absence of an adequacy
decision and of appropriate safeguards as described in article 46 GDPR

Much of this information is currently missing in the templates. Please
note that, in order to obtain “informed” consent, it is not required to
provide all of the information mentioned in articles 13 and 14 GDPR.
However, note that such information should be provided by the controller
elsewhere (for example in a privacy notice/statement), and the
participants should be referred to such information when they are asked
to consent (for example by means of a hyperlink).”

• Ultimately, if the aim is that this document is intended to supplement
existing information letters and informed consent forms, then some of
the commentary above is not applicable, as the researcher using your
template is responsible for informing the participants of this
information. At the same time, solutions to keep participants informed
of new uses (i.e. when a secondary user obtains and uses the data for
new purposes) according to article 14 need to be worked out prior to the
use of such a template. I gather that the intention of your markdown
document is to create standard language for sharing video data
regardless of which data repository will be used. However, prior to the
use of such a template with such a broad scope, several issues need to
be sorted before the text can be used in information letters and
informed consent forms. It may be necessary to have a set of
instructions for use of the template text, as well as conditions that
need to be met before the template can be used (for example, methods for
how the secondary users can meet their obligations under the GDPR,
specifically, how will they inform data subjects about new use of the
data). The conditions that need to be addressed are discussed further
below.

• Both the privacy lawyers and myself are curious how the data
repository will be positioned under the GDPR, i.e. is the intention here
that the repository is also a controller? - Our lawyers said:  
“Allocating GDPR responsibilities in the Databrary landscape

When overlooking the ‘Databrary landscape’ including all of the parties
contributing to it and accessing its digital library, perhaps the most
important and difficult matter in respect of the GDPR is to allocate how
these parties can meet their obligations under the GDPR. In order to the
challenges at stake, it is at first vital to differentiate between the
‘roles’ parties can have under the GDPR:

• Controller: a party which “determines the purposes and means of the
processing of personal data” (art. 4(7) GDPR)

• Processor: a party which “processes personal data on behalf of the
controller” (art. 4(8) GDPR)

Given the purposes of processing, and especially taking into account the
responsibility of Databrary to accept and review proposals from
commercial entities for access to personal data (as described in the
Research Participants’ Rights template), we anticipate that all parties
involved (Databrary, parties contributing to Databrary and parties
accessing Databrary) will qualify as ‘controllers’ under the GDPR. This
means that all of these parties are required to meet all of the
obligations under the GDPR (unlike processors, which only have to meet
certain obligations under the GDPR). Since participants will first and
foremost be in contact with the researcher contributing to Databrary, it
will in practice be very difficult for the other parties (who are
operating in the ‘background’ for the participants) to meet, for
example, their transparency obligations under the GDPR.”

• Therefore, it needs to be clarified exactly what role the data
repository will play in the relationship. It is confusing in the current
text of the markdown document, because it does seem that the repository
is responsible for deciding who gets access. In general, my experience
in Europe is that repositories function solely as processors: they
ensure that the data are maintained indefinitely, but they play no role
is deciding who gets access. So that is something that needs to be
decided upon and made clear. If the intention is that the markdown
template is meant to be applied to any appropriate repository, then it
opens the door to even more complexities, since some repositories may
want to have a controller status and others a processor status.

• The transparency issues for secondary users have been discussed above
(regarding the requirements of article 14). As already stated, this is
something this needs to be addressed prior to the use of the markdown
text in information letters and ICFs.

• The last main technical issue that our lawyers were concerned about is
the nature of data sharing outside the EEA. They write: “International
data transfers

Transfers of personal data from the EEA to the US (and any other
countries outside the EEA) should meet the conditions set out by the
GDPR. One way to comply with these conditions is to conclude Standard
Contractual Clauses between Databrary and each party contributing to and
accessing its library (insofar the GDPR applies). This would require a
lot of complex contracting efforts. Another way to legitimize transfers
from the EEA to Databrary’s repository in the US would be for Databrary
to self-certify under the [EU – US Privacy Shield
Framework](https://www.privacyshield.gov/welcome). With such
certification in place, there is no need for Databrary to conclude
Standard Contractual Clauses with parties located in the EEA
transferring personal data to it in the US. However, such certification
will not legitimize further transfer of these personal data to parties
subsequently accessing these personal data. For more information on
international data transfers, please refer to the [website of the
European
Commission](https://ec.europa.eu/info/law/law-topic/data-protection/international-dimension-data-protection_en).”

• In their assessment of the text, our lawyers focused on the
relationship between the original data collector/controller and
specifically Databrary as the sole possible repository. If the intention
is that this template could be used with other repositories, then the
above issues need also need to be addressed, and the issues to sort out
will vary depending on the country that the repository is located in.

• In addition to addressing what kind of agreement needs to be in place
between the original data collector and the repository, systems need to
be in place for setting up data sharing agreements between the original
data collector and the secondary users. Because ultimately under the
GDPR the original collector is still responsible for the data, so they
are the ones who need to be signing these agreements with secondary
users.

• This is addressed somewhat in the sections “Who will have access to
your data?” and “Permission to permit commercial uses”, but the process
isn’t quite clear at the moment. It seems that for research,
educational, charitable purposes the agreements are made between the
original data collector {HOST INSTITUTION} and the re-user; but that for
commercial purposes databrary.org makes the decision about whether the
data can be accessed for commercial use. Is that the intention here?  
o Also, we need to consider how much detail should be included here with
regards to the legal agreements between the HOST INSTITUTION and the
re-user. If the HOST INSTITUTION deposited data that is protected by the
GDPR and the re-user is located outside the EEA, we need to have
protections in place, most likely through the European Commission’s
standard contractual clauses. I don’t think that level of detail is
necessarily required for the text of the template, but this would need
to be addressed in the instructions for the user of the template  
o Can any registered user access any data, or is the intention that each
registered user needs permission from the original depositor to get
access to the data; the way this section is written is currently not
quite clear?  
 Also, it’s not quite clear what is meant with “To gain access, a user
must apply for sponsorship and receive approval from an academic …
institution”. So, the procedure for gaining access would be to be
approved by an institution who will be responsible for your actions, and
that this institution must already have a legal contract with the
original depositor of the data? And once a user has been approved by
their own institution, they can access the data? I don’t think that’s
how the process is intended to go, but this is how it seems to be
described.  
o Furthermore, regarding commercial uses, if the uses are determined in
advance, then these pre-determined uses should be described to the
participants, so they can be informed in deciding whether or not to
consent to this; this could be a section that the user of the template
could fill in with specifics.

In addition to the points addressed above, there are a few more specific
concerns in the text that I think could be addressed so that it’s more
in line with GDPR requirements. Overall, there tends to be a lot of
broad statements, so either there should be some guidance for those
using the template regarding where the text can be adjusted. For
example:

• under section “Permission to show segments” it is not entirely clear
in which situations recordings will be made to the public via a platform
such as YouTube. That’s a major concern, because it needs to clear to
the individual where exactly the data are ending up. The text seems to
just say, this could happen, but participants need to know more. This
could be something that a user of the template could modify based on
whether or not they intend to allow this to happen (if the video
segments won’t be used in presentations, then perhaps the risk of the
video’s showing up on YouTube is not there).

• Furthermore, in the section “Permission to show segments” there is a
fair bit of generalization. For example, talking about the various
possible situations (“We may also request separate permission) leads to
confusion and lack of clarity for the individual. So, this would be a
section that a user of this template could change based on whether they
are going to ask for consent to show segments or not. Furthermore, if
segments will be shared it needs to be defined as to WHICH segments will
be shared and what kind of information is included in said fragment.
(Note that in the original Databrary.org data [release
template](https://www.databrary.org/resources/templates/release-template.html)
about trusting researchers judgement about excerpts (and thus what could
end up on YouTube), will unfortunately not hold up against the GDPR.
Everything needs to be specific in the GDPR and the participant needs to
have all the power so they need to know what exactly could end up on
YouTube (or elsewhere)).

• under section “What personal data will be stored and shared?”, again
we miss specificity here. “Information supplied by authorized users of
{REPOSITORY} is too vague, so this needs to be a section that a user of
the template must modify to include specifics. Also, it’s not quite
clear for the template user as to what is meant by “information supplied
by authorized users of {NAME OF REPOSITORY} who analyze data you (or
your child) provide”: isn’t it the original researcher (the original
collector of data or host institution) who is providing all of the data,
not other re-users of data. I think much of this section demonstrates
that it is currently not clear who is going to use this template and
subsequently who will present this information to the participant. I
think the researcher (a.k.a. the original collector of data or host
institution) is most suited to pose this information and so the text
should be written from that viewpoint. At the moment, it seems to be
partly from the viewpoint of the repository, which seems less
appropriate.

• under section “How will my personal data be used?”, I would add an
“only” before the list of purposes (educational, scientific etc). It
should be clear to participants that the data will not be re-used for
business or advertising purposes (unless consent is obtained
specifically for those purposes). Users of the template should also have
the option to take out the sections on asking consent for
business/advertising purposes if the user feels this is inappropriate to
ask of their participants and there is no intention for data to be used
for those purposes.  
o Note that this section also goes back to the issues addressed above
regarding how to inform participants about new uses. This is a complex
under the GDPR and the links provided by our privacy lawyers give some
guidance. It is advised that, although research purposes are considered
compatible with the original purposes, as the specifics about the
research purposes become clear, the subjects need to be informed about
these specifics. But at the same time, the secondary users should not
try to identify the subjects solely for the purposes of informing them
about these new uses (a bit of a catch-22). Secondary users could
potentially provide information in the form of a privacy statement on a
webpage, stating that they used data from Databrary with DOI ABCDE, but
there needs to be more infrastructure in place so that data subjects
know where to find this information. Perhaps through a landing page from
the repository, where the data are described, there could also be
information about the contact information for secondary users so that
participants can contact them for more info about secondary uses. This
would of course require active updating of the dataset landing page.
This is definitely a long-term issue and more infrastructural planning
needs to be sorted out, not just for Databrary, but for all repository
systems.  
o There may be the potential for using terms of use, where the secondary
users may only re-use the data for purposes that were pre-defined by the
host institution (original data collector), and therefore described to
the participants in the information letter, but that may limit the value
of the data.

• The following sentence under section “Who will have access to your
personal data?” is a bit confusing: “The institution applying for access
to personal data on {NAME OF REPOSITORY} must agree that your decision
about whether to share your personal data or not must be respected, and
that all regulations and laws that relate to the processing of personal
data where your personal data were collected must be followed” If the
data are in the repository, then the individuals have agreed to the data
being there and being re-used. It is unclear what the secondary user
must agree with here. If someone has not given consent for re-use of
their data, wouldn’t the data not be in repository? And I would think
that ultimately, the original depositor decides if the secondary user
gets access or not anyway.

• Under the section “What if I change my mind?”, I think this section is
quite good. It can go into more detail, however, about risks. I would
expand on the last sentence about being unable to guarantee the
destruction of all copies. It may also be necessary to include more
detail in earlier sections of this template regarding secondary users
and security because the main issue is: once these data are shared, it’s
going to be very hard to be certain that they aren’t re-shared AND we
cannot know for sure if security measures/data laws in certain countries
are an issue. Ultimately, there needs to be more detail about the risks:
that once data are shared there is no guarantee that all copies can be
deleted at a later stage; data will be shared with any and all countries
regardless of the privacy laws and security measures assured by those
countries (in the interest of open science because it’s not fair to
exclude researchers from certain countries just because a given country
may have a bad rap), but that the secondary users do need to provide
assurances of their security measures.  
o A lot of these concerns above are addressed somewhat in section “Risks
of sharing personal data”, however, it mostly mentions the measures that
will be applied to reduce risks and we need to be clear that the risk
can never be reduced to 0. There is always a risk that a secondary user
won’t be careful enough, or won’t abide with the terms of use/data
sharing agreement. We aren’t going to have any ways to check that people
are abiding with agreements unless something goes wrong (i.e. data are
re-shared inappropriately by the user) at which point the data have
already been leaked. So, it needs to be clear that there is always a
risk with the sharing of these types of data and that we take measures
to reduce the risk, but no measure is 100% effective  
o I think what is stated in the Databrary.org release template is
stronger, under the section “How long will information remain in the
library?” because in the template it states that information previously
shared cannot be retrieved. We can still aim to try and retrieve and
destroy the data, but there is always a risk that the data has been
shared beyond our ability to track it down and destroy it.

• Under “Citizens of the EU”, again the generalized nature of the text
makes it confusing. If the data are in fact stored outside the EU and
the data don’t belong to EU residents, then the EU laws don’t apply, but
if data are stored within the EU or the data belongs to EU residents,
then these laws do apply. It depends on the repository in question and
the research team using the template would have to modify the text to
suit the situation. Hence the need for good instructions.

• “Benefits of sharing data” can be expanded upon: what are the specific
benefits to participants, e.g. if data are re-used the participant won’t
have to be repeatedly contacted for similar research again and again,
this pdf from Stanford has a nice summary of a study done on this topic:
(<http://ec.europa.eu/research/participants/data/ref/h2020/grants_manual/hi/ethics/h2020_hi_ethics-self-assess_en.pdf>)

• In the databrary.org release template, I’m not sure I would give a
script to the researchers. I guess it depends on the institution and the
researcher, but perhaps instead of a script you could list the talking
points that need to be addressed with the participants after the
recording is complete, so that they are fully informed about what
sharing the video means.
